# hats_testing_aurora


Scripts and notebooks created to test timing of opening/using source catalogs with the `lsdb` package, and to import source catalogs to the HATS format with `lsdb` and `hats-import`, on the argdev server "Aurora".

These scripts were created to be run by me (Katie) in their current format, but can be adapted for other users.  Whenever you see "I" in this and other files, it means me (Katie).


- This repository contains python scripts used to test importing a source catalog to [HATS](https://github.com/astronomy-commons/hats) format.
- The [`lsdb`](https://github.com/astronomy-commons/lsdb) and [`hats-import`](https://github.com/astronomy-commons/hats-import) packages are used and tested, so both must be installed.
- These scripts were created to be run on the server "Aurora", where I (katie) have installed both of the above packages in my testing virtual environment "argvenv".  Run these scripts in that virtual environment.  
- It is assumed that the reference source catalog ATLAS-Refcat2 is saved to disk in `/etc/rico/atlas_refcat2/` in a the following directory structure:

```
level-0 |- /etc/rico/atlas_refcat2/
level-1    |- 0/ 
level-2    |  |- 0/
           |  |  |- part-0.feather (same file name name in each level 2 directory; contains sources from 4 HEALPix of NSIDE=32)
level-2    |  |- 1/
           |  |...
level-2    |  |- 15/
level-1    |- 1/
           |...
level-1    |-191/ (given 12,288 healpix total of NSIDE=32, 4 pix per .feather file, 1 file per level-2 directory, 16 level-2s per level-1 directory gives 192 level-1 directories)
```

        - To put it in words, there are 192 level-1 numbered directories, each with 16 level-2 numbered diros, and each level-2 diro has a "part-0.feather" file with sources from 4 healpix(NSIDE=32), making 3072 feather files total, each with 4 hpix(NSIDE=32) worth of sources.
        - ATLAS-Refcat2 itself contains 991M rows - on Aurora, the following columns are saved: ['ra', 'dec', 'parallax', 'pmra', 'pmdec', 'g', 'r', 'i', 'h32', 'h64', 'h256']


- Catalogs (samples and full catalogs) imported to HATS format are saved to `/net/scratch/kmfas/`.
- The final goal of this testing is to fully import the entire ATLAS-Refcat2 reference source catalog to HATS format, in order to be able to efficiently analyze and retrieve the catalog for use in Argus HDPS and in generating the Argus Input Catalog.

The `/pics` directory contains images generated by these scripts/notebooks.

The `/scripts` directory contains the following scripts and notebooks:

*(Note that these are listed in order of creation)*

- `select_cat_sample.py`
    - contains a function to select a random sample of sources from a SMALL fraction of a reference catalog (i.e. ATLAS-Refcat2)
        - this was created to test out importing small toy catalogs with both `lsdb.from_dataframe()` and a `hats-import` pipeline.  
    - main code tests timing for reading in a certain percentage of ATLAS for a several numbers of files (in which un-HATS-ed ATLAS sources are saved on Aurora)

- `feather_to_csv_atlas.py`
    - contains a function to create csv files with ATLAS-Refcat2 sources, pulling data from feather files with those sources.  
        - this was created becasue `hats-import` pulls catalog data from files saved to disk, and doesn't have built-in capabilities for reading in feather files.  This is now redundant, as I (Katie) have created a feather file reader that can be utilized by `hats-import` for reading in un-HATSed sources.  This is also requires all the data read from feather files to be saved to disk in csv files, which takes up a lot of memory, hence my creation of a class to read feather files for `hats-import`. 

- `hats_timing_test.py`
    - contains tests to time how long it takes to retrieve sources from a reference catalog (ATLAS) within a cone search of various radii, in crowded and sparse fields.
        - this was done to determine whether we should use `lsdb` to retrieve reference sources from a HATS-ed catalog, for calibrating Argus sources in HDPS.  The pipeline needs to be fast, so the quicker we can call these sources, the better.  LSDB is fast, but it does lazily load the sources and doesn't fully load data until you tell it to; this means all computations are simply "planned" and not executed until further down the road.  Further tests are required.

- `hats_import_smallcat.py`
    - main code selects a fraction of a reference catalog of sources (ATLAS) from disk [or alternatively reads in a small cat you've saved in a csv file, on-disk] and imports the catalog to HATS format with `lsdb.from_dataframe()`.  The HATS-ed catalog is saved to disk.  
        - this is for testing purposes with a small (small!) catalog; for larger samples or full catalogs, use `hats-import` (`hats_import_with_pipeline.py`)
        - (this script was created/used just to make sure importing works on Aurora, and to generate a toy HATS-ed catalog for testing.)

- `hats_import_with_pipeline.py`
    - contains a class to read feather files for `hats-import`
    - contains a function to import a given catalog to HATS format and save to disk using a `hats-import` pipeline, and import arguments
    - main code sets up a `Dask` `Client` and call the above function to read in a certain number of files (or all files) containing un-HATS-ed sources from a reference source catalog (ATLAS) and import the catalog to HATS with a hats-import pipeline, and define import arguments to do so. 
    - this script can be run with `hats_atlas.sh` if you expect it to take a long time (i.e. if you're importing a full catalog, or a large fraction of one)

- `hats_atlas.sh` 
    - a shell script created to import an entire reference source catalog (ATLAS) to HATS format; this is a time-intensie process, and must be done in the background.  
    - I have elected to run this with [TMUX](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki), which allows for processes (on a linux server) to be run in the background, uninterrupted by the user logging out of the server. 
    - note that I am typically not using this shell script, I'm just running the python script directly from the command line.  But it's an option!

- `hats_import_tests.ipynb`
    - a notebook with some testing stuff, still under construction! 

- `hats_visualization.ipynb`
    - a notebook for visualizing catalogs (mostly various fractions of ATLAS) that I have imported to HATS on Aurora.


 



